---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: My 30 at 30
author:
  display_name: ben
  login: ben
  email: ben@ben.ie
  url: ''
author_login: ben
author_email: ben@ben.ie
excerpt: I've reached a milestone and since I'm in a reflective state of mind I thought
  I'd share some things I've learned.
wordpress_id: 4331
wordpress_url: https://ben.ie/?p=4331
date: '2014-09-18 10:18:51 +0100'
date_gmt: '2014-09-18 10:18:51 +0100'
categories:
- Writing
tags: []
comments:
- id: 584
  author: Fluffy Links &#8211; Monday September 22nd 2014 &laquo; Damien Mulley
  author_email: ''
  author_url: https://www.mulley.net/2014/09/22/fluffy-links-monday-september-22nd-2014/
  date: '2014-09-22 07:23:11 +0100'
  date_gmt: '2014-09-22 07:23:11 +0100'
  content: "[&#8230;] Finally a listicle that&#8217;s original and interesting. Ben&#8217;s
    30 at 30. [&#8230;]"
---
<p>I’m thirty now. 30. Officially a grown-up, at least in the eyes of my childhood self. Thirty once seemed like an impossibly long time away, and I suppose it was, looking back on who I was and who I’ve become. To celebrate and commiserate with myself, here’s my thirty things I’ve learned about being thirty in the few hours I’ve had to take it for a spin.</p>
<p>[dropcap]1[/dropcap]  The older you get, the smarter you get. There were things that I was better at ten or fifteen years ago, but in hindsight, I have only gotten more savvy and centred as time has gone on, which makes me optimistic and cheerful about the future.</p>
<p>[dropcap]2[/dropcap]  Friends are important, real friends are essential.</p>
<p>[dropcap]3[/dropcap]  Cooking used to be something annoying I had to do before I could eat, now it’s one of the most enjoyable ways I can spend time. I didn’t see that coming. Still don’t enjoy gardening though.</p>
<p>[dropcap]4[/dropcap]  Even though I’ve changed so much in my lifetime that I feel unrecognisable compared to wee baby Ben, I’ve only become more myself.</p>
<p>[dropcap]5[/dropcap]  Keep an open mind about your career. I once felt pretty smug about the fact that I knew what I wanted to do with my life. Being a filmmaker is all I had ever wanted, and all I thought I’d ever want, but my ambitions and the world have changed. I’m grateful I got the chance to do what I wanted, but even more excited about the next adventure.</p>
<p>[dropcap]6[/dropcap]  Young people don’t take their opposite gender seriously, especially young men. I thought I did, but I really didn’t. Recent ugliness I’ve witnessed has made me more resolute in my support for gender equality, and thankful that I have healthy relationships with the women in my life. Remember, they’re just like us!</p>
<p>[dropcap]7[/dropcap]  The <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pale_Blue_Dot#Reflections_by_Sagan" target="_blank">Pale Blue Dot image and speech</a> blows my mind as much now as it did fifteen years ago. It’ll blow your mind too.</p>
<p>[dropcap]8[/dropcap]  I still don’t know what to do with my hair, but I’m getting there. If you have your hair game figured out, I salute you.</p>
<p>[dropcap]9[/dropcap]  Ditto clothes.</p>
<p>[dropcap]10[/dropcap]  I rarely go to bed later than midnight because I have to be up in the morning. This is a much more enjoyable shift than I expected.</p>
<p>[dropcap]11[/dropcap]  The most valuable skill I’ve ever developed is my ability to listen. It’s brought me great things in life.</p>
<p>[dropcap]12[/dropcap]  Don’t interrupt.</p>
<p>[dropcap]13[/dropcap]  Always sleep on a draft before sending it off. You’ll spot loads of stuff.</p>
<p>[dropcap]14[/dropcap]  Pain and heartbreak are as horrific as they are necessary to become a fully grown and rounded person. My capacity to heal has helped me shape and know myself, though seeking damage willingly is a toxic and dangerous trait.</p>
<p>[dropcap]15[/dropcap]  Be as generous as you can be, but avoid truly selfish people. You should never share with people you’ll end up resenting.</p>
<p>[dropcap]16[/dropcap]  Take care of your feet, they are the tyres of your body.</p>
<p>[dropcap]17[/dropcap]  Know and do what you’re good at, but don’t be afraid to be the worst at something. Even Jimi Hendrix sucked at guitar once.</p>
<p>[dropcap]18[/dropcap]  We’re all in this together.</p>
<p>[dropcap]19[/dropcap]  Be optimistic and assume the best of people. Better to be magnanimous and wrong than bitter and right.</p>
<p>[dropcap]20[/dropcap]  Fight shyness. There’s nothing wrong with being an introvert, but getting to know other people easily is opening your life and your heart to a universe of possibilities.</p>
<p>[dropcap]21[/dropcap]  Getting up early is pretty much always worthwhile. That’s why it’s hard.</p>
<p>[dropcap]22[/dropcap]  Living in the future is cool if you think about it at all:</p>
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>In the nineties, I used to think it would be cool to live in a cyberpunk dystopia… but now I do and it’s actually only alright.<br />
— Marc McEntegart (@SirJolt) <a href="https://twitter.com/SirJolt/status/504568291097341952" target="_blank">August 27, 2014</a></p></blockquote>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>[dropcap]23[/dropcap]  <a href="https://justinmcelroy.wordpress.com/2013/11/08/what-it-has-taken-me-33-years-to-learn/" target="_blank">Learning to enjoy things you didn’t before is a way to find happiness almost anywhere</a>.</p>
<p>[dropcap]24[/dropcap]  Travelling is one of the best ways to spend time and money, as long as you venture out of your comfort zone.</p>
<p>[dropcap]25[/dropcap]  Nothing is static or absolute, life is a series of balancing acts and feedback loops. Making the journey isn't like walking, it’s more like surfing.</p>
<p>[dropcap]26[/dropcap]  Don’t be afraid to cry (<a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Ks_wf1O0mA" target="_blank">in moderation</a>). <i>(Warning! Spoiler for the finale for </i>The US Office<i>)</i></p>
<p>[dropcap]27[/dropcap]  A key to a healthy relationship is respect for one another’s passions. You get that for free if those passions are shared, but if not, take a genuine interest.</p>
<p>[dropcap]28[/dropcap]  Arrogance isn’t confidence, honesty is.</p>
<p>[dropcap]29[/dropcap]  It’s okay to be afraid, but sometimes you have to be brave as well.</p>
<p>[dropcap]30[/dropcap]  The way you do anything is the way you do everything.</p>
<p><em>Many thanks to <a href="https://www.mrhomergoestowashington.com/about/" target="_blank">Mr. Homer Goes To Washington</a> for the awesome banner pic.</em></p>
