The open web. Using markdown instead of a CMS. Taking ownership back of your computing. Leaning into the friction as giving you purchase rather than being funnelled down someone else's business model.

---
# A Broader Context
Staring down both barrels of an international trade war with the United States, it's hard to imagine a scenario in which tarrifs on services and digital products does not begin to feature. Living in Ireland, most US "exports" I consume are digital in nature, which is both hard to imagine and kind of scary. I try to think of Netflix, Prime, Apple TV+, iCloud, Spotify, AnyList, Plex, Dropbox and more all suddenly skyrocketing in price, or even worse, free/freemium services like GitHub, GitLab, Google, WhatsApp, Substack, Gmail, Instagram, all getting an EU-mandated paywall.

# The Upside
In a way it's kind of exciting, honestly. We have been coddled and infantalised by modern (mostly US-founded and run) tech firms for too long. This idea is explored in The Apple II Age, which I <a href="{{ '2023-07-27-reading-the-apple-ii-age' | relative_url }}">mentioned a couple of years ago</a> and the idea that computing was _made_ mainstream without our best interests at heart. Looking at the ills bestowed on the world by Big Tech, and the unimaginable (as in, they are hard to imagine, though in a way you don't have to, because they are very, very real) fortunes amassed at our expense. To paraphrase Cory Doctorow, we must interrogate not just what these technologies do, but _who_ they do it _to_ and _who_ they do it _for_.

# Marks
The smartphone is where it all went very, very wrong. Personal Computers were big business in the 90s and noughties but computing didn't go completely mainstream until the modern idea of a smartphone was marketed (the iPhone and later Android phones). Computers, as most of us think of them, whether laptop or desktop, require fluency, practice to use effectively. They're basically totally open – yes, even Macs – to the user. You own the machine, you probably license the software, but you can do, and run, anything you like. It's a tool for _you_ to do whatever you want, and while likely billions of dollars have been spent making them easier to use, they still have a learning curve.

By contrast, the smartphone has had all the friction sanded off. Hiding the file system, limiting the scope of multitasking, removing the need to type or to use a mouse and replacing them with a completely direct form of input - no abstraction, almost no learning, required. These are all **kind of** good things, _if_ they were done to empower more people to use technology to create more things, but the way that Apple and increasingly Google and Samsung, have locked down their devices and built walled gardens for themselves is evidence that these resources were spent to build moats and foster lock-in. These companies didn't want to empower us, they wanted to infantalise us. Make us dependent on technology while also working very hard to ensure the vast majority of us didn't understand how to truly use it.